BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY & SCIENCE, PILANI
HYDERABAD CAMPUS
Semester II (2018-19) – Mid-Semester Examination
HSS F 322 - Social and Political Ecology
Type of Exam: Open Book				                                     Date:07/03/2018
Max. Marks:  30 Marks
Time: 90 mins (1:30 – 3:00 pm)						 Weighting:  30%
Instructions to Students
    • This question paper has 3 Sections
    • Only the textbook (hard copy) and bound class notes are allowed in the examination hall. No loose sheets of paper are allowed. 
    • Answer all questions. All parts of a question should be answered together
Section I
(2 marks * 5 question = 10 Marks)
Word limit – 30 words each
Case Study: A documentary shown and discussed in class spoke of commons and common lands in India as being crucial for the rural economy and the livelihoods of the rural poor. The commons play a vital role in maintaining ecological balance. Set in Rajasthan, the film explores the issue of the commons in three villages Achalpur, Thoria and Sanjari Ka Badiya. These villages are among several others which have started the process of regeneration and conservation of common lands in the last 15 years, with support from the Foundation for Ecological Security. A major threat to commons initiatives comes from mining, quarrying and encroachment. Having successfully overcome various threats to the commons, these villages have now set an example for other villages in the state. Answer the following questions based on the case study:
    1. What are commons? (2 marks)
    2. Explain how commons are successfully managed in this case. (2 marks)
    3. Discuss the role of the community. (2 marks)
    4. Explain the connection between livelihood and the commons. (2 marks)
    5. How can the tragedy of the commons occur? (2 marks)

Section II
(4 marks * 3 Questions = 12 Marks)
Word limit – 200 words
    1. Environmental change and ecological conditions are the product of political process. Identify four issues related to forest loss to support this statement.
    2. Orientalism justifies the domination of one part of the earth by the other. Explain this statement by applying it to the instance of mercury poisoning that happened in Kodaikanal.
    3. Rachel Carson in her book Silent Spring in 1962 questioned the use of pesticides as an ‘acceptable risk’ or as the ‘inevitable’ price of progress and began to ask why and how these stories and concepts were proliferated in the first place. Analyse how theories of power and knowledge apply in this scenario.

Continued in the next page….

Section III
(8 marks * 1 question = 8 Marks)
Word limit – 400 words

Analyse the case given below by drawing a Chain of Explanation chart and explaining the same in words. Also illustrate the forms of marginalization that occur.

In 1978 the government of India, working with a large number of NGOs, set out to modernize the cattle breeding system of the poorest communities in Orissa, a state long plagued by drought and poverty and highly dependent on the milk proteins their few cattle provided. As reported by journalist P. Sainath, the project was greeted with tremendous enthusiasm by all those involved. The region’s poorest households were given a free cow, impregnated with Jersey semen to create offspring with high milk yields. They were further provided with an acre of free land to grow trees for animal fodder. Finally, they were provided with minimum wage payments for their labor with the trees and animals until the new modernization project got off the ground and the benefits of purebred Western animals were experienced by all, in the form of plentiful milk, good sales, and a sustainable future (Sainath 1996).

By 1990 the project was in a shamble. Most villages across the region were now without any animals, including not only the new hybrid, but also their traditional subsistence beasts for milk and burden-bearing. The region’s traditional Khariar bull, long treasured and outbred for profit, was biologically extinct. The trees, once harvested, had died. The land had been reclaimed for marginal food crops. Modern development had made local people more destitute and had depleted much of the region’s environmental resources and faunal biodiversity. A project intended to decrease outmigration from the area had increased it, forcing more independent producers into low-wage labor (Sainath 1996).



