BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY & SCIENCE PILANI 
HYDERABAD CAMPUS
Second Semester, 2017-18 

Course No. GS F233		Course Title: Public Policy
    	
    Mid-semester Test: CLOSED Book

Total Marks: 30 (30% weighting)
Date: 8th March 2018	
      Time: 11:00 am - 12:30 pm     

Answer ALL questions.
Section A: (5 marks * 4 = 20 marks). Each answer should not exceed 1.5 sides/pages.   
    1) Identify two major insights offered by the ‘post-positivist’ approach. Demonstrate the relevance/irrelevance of this approach through a policy example from India. 
    2) Discuss the key aspects of agenda setting and identify the most important among them. Establish the role of electronic media (or elites), with evidence from India, in setting a public policy agenda.
    3) Discuss the rationale underlying distributive policies. ‘Most distributive policies serve mere political than actual social needs/purposes today.’ Reflect on this statement and substantiate your views with evidence. 
    4) Discuss the core aspects and advantages of regulation. ‘Regulation in India has failed to deliver its intended outcomes.’ Substantiate your agreement/disagreement with evidence from India.
Section B: (10 marks * 1 = 10 marks). The answer should not exceed 2.5 sides/pages.   
    5) “We will do it with dedication to see a great, majestic India by 2022. So we will together build such an India where the poor will have Pucca House with electricity and water. Together we will build such an India where the farmers can sleep without worry. They will earn double by 2022 of what they are earning today. Together we will build such an India where nobody will compromise with corruption and nepotism. Together we will build such an India which will be clean and healthy, and where the dream of Su-Raj will be fulfilled. And that is why my dear fellow countrymen, we will together strive to move ahead in this march towards development…” 
Analyse this statement using insights from public choice theory. Do you agree (or disagree) that public choice theory fails to provide a contextual understanding of the above statement?

-----------------------------------------------------------------
