Birla Institute of Technology and Science, Pilani – Hyderabad Campus
Course:  GS F221					                 	 Business Communication
Instructor: Dr. Aruna Lolla                                                                   	 Max. Marks: 40
 7th , May, 2018			        		     		 Open book test, 3 hours
 			Comprehensive Examination
__________________________________________________________________________________
Additionals will not be provided.

Answer all the questions. Word limit has been given (within brackets )towards the end of each question 

    I. Assume that as professor of Management Studies in a reputed university, you propose to organize a national seminar on Conflict Management. Inventing necessary details, prepare a brochure (with suitable format showing cover page, headings and sub headings )that you would send to prospective participants providing all the required information. ( a maximum of 4 pages)									10 marks

    II. Given below is an interview for selection of Army Officers. Fresh graduates are tested for their physical, mental and psychological competence for the job. The selection process lasts for five days and one-to –one personal interview is the final part of it.  Analyze the personality traits of this candidate from the view point of the employer in 5-10 bulleted points and state if he is selected or rejected giving the most important reasons for the same. ( a maximum of 2 pages)							10 marks


Our candidate enters the interview room rather disheartened, as he does not seem to have fared well in the Group Tests involving Outdoor activities. The interviewing officer can also detect the expression of disillusionment on his face.  Nevertheless, as is their usual practice, he refuses to get biased and is all set for assessing the candidate’s credentials for selection on the basis of his performance during the interview.  As soon as the candidate approaches him, he politely tells him to be seated and make himself comfortable.

Candidate.  Thank you, sir
Officer. You do not appear to be in very good spirits. Are you all right?
Candidate. Physically, yes, but I am utterly dissatisfied with my performance during the Group tests.
Officer. What has made you think you have not done well?
Candidate. Everything, sir.  It appears my over-anxiety to do well has let me down.
Officer. Why were you so very anxious to do well?  After all, not getting into the services does not mean that all avenues for a brilliant career have been closed for you.
Candidate. No, sir.  I am not worried whether other avenues are open to me or not.  I had set my heart on becoming a soldier for as long as I can remember. And I was pretty confident that I would make it.  But things seem to have turned the other way.
Officer. You know, we in the Services do not approve of pessimism.
Candidate. Oh no!  I have never been a pessimist nor am I now in spite of everything.  I have  still another chance and that I shall not let slip by.
Officer. Do you intend coming back, if we turn you down this time?
Candidate. Of course, and then I shall not leave anything to chance.
Officer. Did you leave anything to chance this time?
Candidate. Sure, I did Sir. I was foolishly complacent and reckoned that I had the requisite qualities of a successful army officer. I was kind of under-prepared.
Officer. How do you propose tackling your preparation for the next shot?
Candidate. Now I know what I lack. I shall go the whole way to plug the hole.
Officer. What do you lack?
Candidate. To appreciate the other person’s angle.
Officer. What of that?
Candidate. That has landed me in dire strides.  I tried to dominate all boys in my group in which I succeeded to some extent, but when I was called upon to following the instructions of another boy, who was conducting the show at that movement, I simply found myself disinclined.  Of course, I knew immediately that I was wrong, but by then I had missed my shot.
Officer. Why do you want to get into the Service?
Candidate. It is because the life of a soldier fascinates me.
Officer. If I were you, I would say a soldier serves his mother land.
Candidate. Of course, he does. But that way he is not alone.  Everyone who does his work sincerely, may he be in any walk of life, is serving his motherland in one way or the other.
Officer. But a soldier risks his life, doesn’t he?
Candidate. I may be excused for my audacity.  But he is paid to risk his life.
Officer. If interpreted logically, you seem to make me believe that working for the Service is as good as working everywhere.
Candidate. Provided one is sincere in one’s work.
Officer. Then why are you keen on joining the Services?
Candidate. Because I like to be a soldier.
Officer. Why do you like to be a soldier?
Candidate. There is not a dull moment in the life of a soldier.
Officer. So you wish we will have to satisfy your sense of adventure. If that is so, I suggest you to become a professional hunter or something of that nature.
Candidate. But hunting to my mind is devoid of any objective, whereas a soldier lives dangerously with a purpose and for a cause.
Officer (looks at the candidate intently) I guess I have nothing more to ask you.
Candidate (getting up), Thank you, sir. (He is seen leaving the room with brisk steps. The officer notices even that.)


    III. Read the sample negotiation given below and mark out which part represents which step from the six basic steps of negotiation. Mention the paragraph number, initial and last few words of a given sentence or group of sentences against the description or a certain step of negotiation. 									6 marks

    1. Neha is interested in buying a new refrigerator.  She has studied advertisements in the newspapers and selected an appliance shop that seems to have good prices.  She has done enough homework to know exactly what she wants and has a good idea of what she should pay. On entering the store, she introduces herself to a salesperson, learns his/her name, and tells him/her she would like to have someone who knows refrigerators show her different models.  She is careful to clearly establish her purpose and a business-like tone.  She observes the salesperson’s attitude and approach to the sales closely to pick up clues to the stores sales policies, willingness to bargain, and desire to satisfy new customers.

    2. The salesperson responds to Neha’s statement by asking her what she wants in a refrigerator in terms of size, accessories, and efficiency of operation.  He/she also asks her for a price range.  Neha outlines her needs and the salesperson acknowledges they can be met by most of the manufacturers he/she represents.  He/she does tell her, however, that she has selected some expensive options that will take her above her expressed price range. Neha replies, ‘I do not see why they should.’

    3. Neha determines the model she wants and asks the price.  The salesperson says ,Rs.17,999.’  Neha is shocked because, by her understanding of the advertisements, it should not be more than Rs.15,500 and she says so.  The salesperson points out that this particular model has two features not included in the sales models.  Neha acknowledges this but still questions the added cost.

    4. After some discussion, Neha says, ‘I just can’t pay that much.  I will look elsewhere.’ The salesperson suggests a cheaper model, but Neha stands firm.  The salesperson then says, ‘Could you handle Rs.17,000? Neha echoes, Rs.17000?’ The salesperson adds, ‘That includes transportation and connection’.  Neha answers, ‘I cannot exceed Rs.15,500.’

    5. The salesperson responds to Neha’s offer of Rs.15,500 by saying, ‘I jut could not do that but I will let you have it for Rs.16,500.’  Neha replies, ‘Well, okay. If that includes delivery and installation you can write up the order.

    IV. Choose the right answer from the options given for each question. The passages given in questions from 3 to 6 are followed by four alternative Paraphrases each. Choose the option that best explains the meaning of a given passage.  								6 marks



    1) All members of the Miller family are busy this morning. Mom is putting the sandwiches and drinks into the cooler. Dad is locking all the windows in the house. Rick is packing his suitcase and making sure his younger sister, Angela, packs her socks and shoes. In a few minutes they will take the cooler out to the car and load it in the back. They'll put books, tapes, and pillows in the car. Then, they'll all get in the car and start their trip to Grandpa Miller's house—well before the sun rises.

What is the best topic sentence for this paragraph?
    a. Mom made the sandwiches the night before.
    b. The Millers take books and tapes on car trips.
    c. Always start a long trip before dawn.
    d. The Miller family is getting ready for a long car trip.

    2) Opportunities to help others are all around us. It doesn't matter if you can sing or draw. It doesn't matter if you can cook or build. The desire to help others is all you really need. You can pick up litter in the park. You can visit someone in a nursing home. You can choose among hundreds of ways to make the world a better place. Make a difference today. Volunteer.

Which is the best topic sentence for this paragraph?
    a. Every volunteer helps make the world a better place.
    b. My mother and I like to bake cookies for Grandma.
    c. Litter is a problem in many parks.
    d. I saw a volunteer list on the board.

    3)  “In short, adoption is a ubiquitous social institution in American society, creating invisible relationships with biological and adoptive kin that touch far more people than we imagine.” 
a. In America, more people are adopted than was originally thought.
b. Adoption touches a surprising number of people throughout American society.
 c. Because adoptees are “invisible,” their circumstances are hard to imagine.
d. Relationships between biological and adoptive kin have international scope.

4)   “While raising a family is inherently stressful, adoption is filled with additional tensions that are unique to the adoptive relationship.” 
a. Families that adopt children can avoid some of the tensions inherent in biological families.
b. Raisingafamilyunderstressfulconditionscandiscouragepotentialadoptiveparents.
c. The adoptive relationship is inherently stressful.
d. Families with an adopted member face more challenges than biological families.
    5) “Third, in a nation that sanctifies blood kinship, adoptive families and adoptees are stigmatized because of their lack of biological relationship.” 
a. Nations that sanctify blood relationships are often stigmatized.
b. Adoptive families and adoptees are treated like criminals in nations that over-value blood relationships.
c. Where blood kinship is excessively valued, adoption is considered inferior.
d. In some nations, adoptees do not have the same legal relationship to their adoptive parents as blood kin have to their birth parents.
    6) “Opposing these adoptees, some birth mothers argued that they were promised secrecy when they relinquished their children for adoption and that abrogating that promise constituted an invasion of privacy.” 
a. Some birth mothers who were promised secrecy about their role felt that breaking that promise was an invasion of their privacy.
b. In order to retain their privacy, some birth mothers refused to reveal their identities when they relinquished their children for adoption.
c. Some adoptees support their birth mothers’ right to secrecy, even if it was promised to them when they gave their children for adoption.
d. Some birth mothers felt that their biological children’s pursuit of their identities should be abandoned based on the possibility that the birth mother requested privacy.

    V. Write a short note on Cross Cultural Communication with some useful tips for youngsters who plan to go abroad for higher studies or work. (a maximum of 2 pages)				8 marks



