BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND SCIENCE, PILANI Hyderabad Campus
Comprehensive Examination (Semester II, 2017-2018)
GS F326 Creative Thinking 
May 9, 2018             Open Book              Time: 3 Hours 		Marks: 80 (40% weighting)
All questions are compulsory. Write your answers in order (starting with Q1).

Q1. Choose the right option for each of the following questions. (1 X 10 = 10 marks)
1.1 Simon, Cheryl and Dannii are all going by train to London to watch a singing competition. Cheryl gets the 2.15 pm train. Simons train journey takes 50% longer than Danniis. Simon catches the 3.00 pm train. Dannii leaves 20 minutes after Cheryl and arrives at 3.25 pm. When will Simon arrive?
i) 3.45		ii) 4		iii) 4.15		iv) 4.30 		v) 4.45

1.2 An old treasure map has the following instructions:
Stand next to the black rock and face west. Walk 20 yards and then turn 90 degrees clockwise. Walk another 10 yards and then turn 45 degrees anticlockwise. Walk another 15 yards, reverse your direction and walk 5 yards back. Turn 135 degrees clockwise and walk another 10 yards. 
In which direction are you now facing?

i) E 		ii) W		iii) N 		iv) S		v) SE
1.3 Mrs Krashem, a driving instructor, has to arrange bookings for some of her pupils. She has 8 new pupils who wish to book either a morning or afternoon of a particular day. These are 2 hour introductory lessons, so she only sees one pupil each morning or afternoon.
Ms Banger is only available Tuesday AM but Mr Bumpem can make any time on a Wednesday.
Mrs Exhaust is free on Tuesdays all day but Mr Hilstart is only free Wednesday afternoons.
Ms Boot is only available Friday AM whereas Miss Bonnet can only make Saturday PM.
Mrs Speed is available all day Fridays whereas Mr Parker can make any time on a Saturday.
Which of the following pair must have MORNING appointments?
i) Mr Bumpem and Mrs Exhaust		ii) Mrs Exhaust and Mr Parker		      
iii) Mr Parker and Mr Speed			iv) Mrs Speed and Mrs Exhaust		
v) Mr Bumpem and Mr Parker

1.4 In a horse race: Hill Royal came in ahead of Trigger. Hill Royal finished after Black Beauty.
Copenhagen beat Black Beauty but finished after Bucephalus. Where did Copenhagen finish?
i) First		ii) Second		iii) Third		iv) Fourth	  	v) Fifth

1.5 In a horse race: Hill Royal came in ahead of Trigger. Hill Royal finished after Black Beauty. Copenhagen beat Black Beauty but finished after Bucephalus. Where did Hill Royal finish?
i) First		ii) Second		iii) Third		iv) Fourth		v) Fifth
1.6 Debbie, Kimi and Michael have Ferraris. Michael also has a Reliant Robin. Jensen has a Mercedes and a Model T. Rubens also has a Mercedes. Debbie also has a Bugatti Veyron. Rubens has just bought a Toyota Prius.
Who has the fewest cars?
i) Debbie 		ii) Kimi 	    iii) Michael 		iv) Jensen 	v) Rubens

1.7 Jensen, Lewis and Mika need to be able to run 100m in under 12.5 seconds to qualify for a championship.
Lewis and Mika run faster than Jensen. Jensen’s best time for the 100m is 13.1 seconds.
Which of the following MUST be true?
i) Only Lewis qualifies	 	ii) Jensen doesn’t qualify	 	iii) Lewis and Mika both qualify	 	iv) Jensen qualifies	 		v) No one qualifies

1.8 Hanif, Horace, Hilary and Hannah are students. Hanif and Horace speak Chinese, whereas the others speak Arabic. Horace and Hannah speak Albanian. Everyone except Hanif speaks Esperanto.
Who only speaks Arabic and Esperanto?
i) Hanif 		ii) Horace 		iii) Hilary		iv) Hannah

1.9 Hanif, Horace, Hilary and Hannah are students. Hanif and Horace speak Chinese, whereas the others speak Arabic. Horace and Hannah speak Albanian. Everyone except Hanif speaks Esperanto.
Who speaks more than one language but not Arabic?
i) Hanif 		ii) Horace 		iii) Hilary 		iv) Hannah

1.10 Josh the postman has eleven red rubber bands; he gives Sunita three bands. Sunita now has twice the number of bands Josh has left.
How many bands did Sunita have at the beginning?
i) 13 			ii) 14		iii) 15 			iv)16 			v) 17

Q2. Evaluate the role of motivation, environment and training in promoting creativity in the light of nature-nurture debate. (250 words, 10 marks)










Q3. Analyse the given figure obtained through a multiple intelligences test taken by a person and describe the creative abilities of the person using information from the figure. (250 words, 10 marks)




Q4. Comment on each of the following statements in 30 words. (5 X 6 = 30 marks)  

i) Textbook is a political tool.
ii) Metacognitive awareness is an essential component of creative thinking. 
iii) Creative meritocracy is a sham.
iv) Reservation system in India can be justified using theories of creative thinking.
v) Engineering does not allow any space for creativity.
vi) Developing tasks to promote creativity is fool-proof.

Q5. Read the following passages and critically comment on the validity of the argument put forward in each of them in 150 words. (10 X 2 = 20 marks)

i) The principle of the sanctity of human life, as it is invoked in contemporary American life, is likely to combine residual religious attitudes with moral sensibilities that owe little of their current acceptance to the offices of any historic religion. Thus the sentiment, “Man is endowed by the Creator with certain inalienable rights,” may be what is intended by the sanctity of life. But it is possible that “endowed by the Creator” is simply the religious equivalent of “sanctity” and could be elided without serious damage to “sanctity.” That suggests a further reduction, namely, that the function of sanctity can be fully discharged by “inalienable rights.” A mere suggestion, so far. In fact, it overlooks or unduly minimizes a persistent religious investment in sanctity: something demanding unequivocal respect, not like regard for a fundamental value but acknowledgment of territory whose boundaries are not to be breached. Related to inalienable rights the compound result is something like this: (a) “inalienable” does not mean that a moral justification for overriding such a right cannot be provided. But that justification cannot be an appeal to a provisional gain for another person, for society, or for humanity at large. Morally, inalienable gives ground to inalienable, intrinsic only to intrinsic—if, that is, there is more than one inalienable right, (b) if God is the source, or the guarantor, of any human right, any violation of that right, no matter how high-minded its motive or intention, incurs transcendental guilt. Whether or how such guilt can be discharged or atoned for is a question to which every religion speaks; each has its own answer.

(Source: “Creation, Creativity, and the Sanctity of Human Life” by Julian N. Hartt)


ii) According to Kant imagination has a constitutive connection to creativity: a component of genius is spirit, and this is “the faculty for the presentation of aesthetic ideas; by an aesthetic idea, however, I mean that representation of the imagination that occasions much thinking though without it being possible for any determinate thought, i.e., concept, to be adequate to it, which, consequently, no language fully attains or can make intelligible” (Ak. 5: 314). For Kant, imagination is the faculty to intuit even when an object is not present, and he distinguishes between reproductive imagination (for instance, memory images) and productive imagination, ‘the authoress of voluntary forms of possible intuitions,” which is a free use of the imagination (Ak 5: 240). It is the latter that the genius employs. But it is mysterious what exactly an aesthetic idea is. Cohen has argued that it is ‘a kind of bloated intuition, an intuition too ample to be subsumed under any concept’ (140), and this fits well with creativity in the sensory domain, where the richness of a painter’s colours and shapes may resist conceptual classification. But Kant’s examples are all drawn from poetry and suggest that by aesthetic ideas he means metaphors, which can indeed occasion much thought, without any determinate concept (paraphrase) being adequate to them (Gaut, ‘Creativity and Imagination’ 164). While richly suggestive, Kant’s claims about the connection between creativity and imagination are frustratingly elusive.

(Source: “The Philosophy of Creativity” by Berys Gaut)

