BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY & SCIENCE, PILANI
HYDERABAD CAMPUS
Course No. BITS F 212
Course Name- Environment Development and Climate Change  

Mid Semester (Closed Book)				                      Date- 8-3-2018
Max. Marks:  30
Time: 90 min.							                      Weighting   : 30%


All parts of a question should be answered together. 

    1. Write brief note on the following [2x5
        1.1. ‘Tinnai’ concept and its relation to different occupation 
        1.2.  J C Kumarappa  
        1.3.  Environmental work of ‘Dashauli Gram Swaraj Mandal (DGSM)’
        1.4.  ‘Save the Western Ghat’ March in 1987-88
        1.5.  ‘Satyagraha’ and different form of protests

    2. Was Gandhi an early environmentalist? Support your analysis with examples and illustrations. [4

        3.1. Describe the context in which ‘Mulshi Satyagraha’ broke out in Maharashtra [2

        3.2.  What distinguishes ‘Narmada movement’ from similar other protests against large dams? [3
3.3. Analyze the main ideological trends or perspectives in Indian environmentalism. Illustrate their key features, approach and differences. [6
3.4. How does ‘environmentalism’ differ in the context of a first World country such as US and a developing country such as India? [5












BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY & SCIENCE, PILANI
HYDERABAD CAMPUS
Course No. F 212 
Course Name- Environment Development and Climate Change
CE (Closed Book)		                                                                             Max. Marks:  45
Time: 3 hours						                             Weighting:  45%
Answer all six questions. 
All parts of a question should be answered together. 

1.1. Analyze evolution of Green Revolution globally. Identify different stages within it and key individuals and institutions which played a significant role. [4
1.2. Explain how did the idea, ‘Green revolution’ succeeded in appealing to influential segments of societies in Asian and Latin American countries? [2
1.3. Illustrate with example, ecological and social consequences of Green revolution.  [3

2.1. Write note on a) ‘Nicholas Stern’s Report’ and b) ‘Kyoto protocol’    [2+2 
2.2. Analyze the concept ‘additionality’ in the context of Clean Development Mechanism. [2
2.3. Identify limitations and shortcomings found in ‘Clean Development Mechanism’ approach?  [3
2.4. Examine ‘carbon tax’ as a means to stabilize GHG emission. What are the problems with it? [2

3.1. Which explanations are proposed, from the point of view of moral and ethical connection, to account lack of pro-environmental behavior in the context of climate change? [3
3.2. Distinguish between vulnerability based moral arguments from system based arguments, in relation to climate change adaptation. [3

4.1. Vilasrao Salunkhe, an engineer turned social worker pioneered ‘Pani Panchayat’ model in Naigon village of Maharashtra. Identify the main principles which guide community rights and access to ‘Pani Panchayat’ schemes? [2
4.2. What is Science Technology Studies (STS) approach? Explain [2
P.T.O.
5. Climate change is projected to cause increase in frequency and/or intensity of extreme weather events. In this background, a) why is it hard to detect and attribute changes in impacts of extreme events?                 b) What are the sources of uncertainty in studies that uses loss normalization approach? [2+3
6. In the analysis of barriers to climate change adaptation, the authors develop a framework comprising of three key components; an idealized depiction of a rational decision making process, a set of interconnected structural elements and third, a matrix to map the source of barriers. Explain the framework including the three component with examples. [10

