BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY & SCIENCE, PILANI
HYDERABAD CAMPUS
Semester II (2017-18) – Comprehensive Examination
HSS F 322 - Social and Political Ecology
Type of Exam: Closed Book				                                     Date:07/05/2018
Max. Marks:  40 Marks
Time: 3 hrs								 	Weighting:  40%
Instructions to Students
    • This question paper has 3 Sections
    • Answer all questions. 
    • All parts of a question should be answered together
Section I
(3 marks * 3 question = 9 Marks)
Word limit – 100 words each

Section II
(5 marks * 3 Questions = 15 Marks)
Word limit – 200 words each
    1) Discuss the Degradation and Marginalization thesis using the documentary screened in class titled “Narmada Diary”.

    2) Read the case below and elaborate on the role of women in environmental conservation:
“The Chipko movement was sparked off in 1972-73 when the people of Chamoli district in northwest India protested the auctioning of 300 ash trees to a sports good manufacturer, while the local labor cooperative was refused permission by the government to cut even a few trees to make agricultural implements for the community. Women’s involvement in protest against the commercial exploitation of the Himalayan forests has been not only jointly with the men of their community when they were confronting non-local contractors but also, in several subsequent instances, even in opposition to village men due to differences in priorities about resource use. Time and again, women have clear-sightedly opted for saving forests and the environment over the short-term gains of development projects with high environmental costs.”


    3) Why are the two maps of the same area shown below so different? Critically analyze the difference using a political ecology perspective.










Section III
(8 marks * 2 Questions = 16 Marks)
Word limit – 300 words each
    1. Read the argument given below and illustrate it using a case study:
The environmental conflict thesis: increasing scarcities produced through resource enclosure or appropriation by state authorities, private firms, or social elites accelerate conflict between groups (gender, class, or ethnicity). Similarly, environmental problems become “politicized” when local groups (gender, class, or ethnicity) secure control of collective resources at the expense of others by leveraging management interventions by development authorities, state agents, or private firms. 
    2. Read the following case study and explain it by applying the theory of Environment Subjects and Identities:
In the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, the forests of Kumaon, a hilly and forested region of Northern India, came increasingly under the control of officers of the forest and revenue departments of the British colonial authority. Unfortunately for these well-meaning bureaucrats and field officers, these same forests had long been the domain and key resource for the villagers of the region, who responded by burning down the woods, repeatedly, effectively, and with economic and ecological effect. For several decades, the harder officials sought to enforce and control these forests, the more the forests were set on fire, as frustrated authorities found no way of controlling local resistance. 

The colonial authorities were forced to concede and allow local forest councils to govern and control forests in the region, a policy continued by the Government of India after independence. This concession to local control, was accompanied by a concomitant institutional change, which obligated local committees to track and categorize the forests of the region, to work with thousands of residents to establish rules, and to launch an ongoing census of forest resources. This combination of decentralization of authority with the promulgation of local responsibilities, led to the end of the fires that had previously stymied state authorities. Kumaonis, incredibly, now vigorously protected the forests they had previously burned, even as they counted them, propagated rules about them, and came to govern their own behaviors more aggressively.
