BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY & SCIENCE, PILANI – HYDERABAD
I Semester 2013-2014         Course No: HSS F328                           Marks: 40                       Date: 10 /12/14
Course Title: Human Resource Development    Duration: 120min             PART-B : Open Book 

I. Joe Black was trying to figure out what to do about a problem salary situation he had in his plant. Black recently took over as president of Acme Manufacturing. The founder and former president, Bill George, had been president for 35 years. The company was family owned and located in a small eastern Arkansas town. It had approximately 250 employees and was the largest employer in the community. Black was the member of the family that owned Acme, but he had never worked for the company prior to becoming the president. He had an MBA and a law degree, plus five years of management experience with a large manufacturing organization, where he was senior vice president for human resources before making his move to Acme. 
  A short time after joining Acme, Black started to notice that there was considerable inequity in the pay structure for salaried employees. A discussion with the human resources manager led him to believe that salaried employees pay was very much a matter of individual bargaining with the past president. Hourly paid factory employees were not part of this problem because they were unionized and their wages were set by collective bargaining. Also they were paid based on number of unit produced. Some of the employees were paid on standard hours. An examination of the salaried payroll showed that there were 25 employees, ranging in pay from that of the president to that of the receptionist. A closer examination showed that 14 of the salaried employees were female. Three of these were front-line factory supervisors and one was the human resources director. The other 10 were non-management.
     This examination also showed that the human resources manager appeared to be underpaid, and that the three female supervisors were paid somewhat less than any of the male supervisors. However, there were no similar supervisory jobs in which there were both male and female job incumbents. When asked, the HR manager  said she thought the female supervisors may have been paid at a lower rate mainly because they were women, and perhaps George, the former president, did not think that women needed as much money because they had working husbands. However, she added she personally thought that they were paid less because they supervised less-skilled employees than did the male supervisors. Black was not sure that this was true. 
   The company from which Black had moved had a good job evaluation system. Although he was thoroughly familiar with and capable in this compensation tool, Black did not have time to make a job evaluation study at Acme. Therefore, he decided to hire a compensation consultant i.e. you to help him.
   You decide to use the point method for job evaluation for HR manager and supervisor because it is the most commonly used job evaluation method. Next, the compensable factors, degrees and weights of each factor must be determined. With input from the job evaluation committee and your knowledge of the organization’s mission and work content; three common compensable factors are selected: skill, responsibility and effort, each having two specific sub-factors. For example, the compensable factor of Skill is comprised of education level and the degree of technical skills, Effort is comprised of problem solving and task complexity.  Responsibility has sub- factor as scope of control and impact of job.  You recommend weighting the skill compensable factor at 50 percent because the organization depends heavily on its human capital. Responsibility is weighted 30 percent because each job has the potential to affect other jobs, and effort is assigned 20 percent because problem solving and task complexity are integral across jobs in the organization. You believes in having maximum 3 degree for each compensable factors. After determining the job evaluation points, you meet with Black to discuss a pay level strategy for each job family. One decision resulting from these meetings is that your organization will pay 10 percent above the market in base pay for the HR and supervisors job families. To ensure that the pay structure is externally competitive, a pay survey will be conducted. Market survey indicates that HR manager on average gets $1000 and Supervisor gets $600 per month. (25M)

 
        1.1. What are the three essential equities need to be considered while designing pay structure? Does that exist in the Acme Manufacturing? Take inferences from the case to justify your choice. How formal salary structure design can resolves these basic equity issues (5M)
1.2 You are asked to determine salary of Store manager that need 3 degree each of education level, task complexity and problem solving, 2 degree of impact of job and 1 degree each of technical skill and scope of control.  As per the job evaluation, Supervisor need 1 degree of all sub- factors except for “impact of job” that need 2 degree. Design basic pay for Store manager and Supervisor based on point method.  (10M)

1.3 Are there any mention about incentive plan in the Caselet. .What incentive plan you think would work better for the supervisors? Suggest some benefit plan for Supervisors especially the female supervisors. (10M)

II. Employees safety and health are very important matters in the laundry, and cleaning business. Each facility is a small production plant in which machines, powered by high-pressure steam and compressed air, work at high temperatures washing, cleaning, and pressing garments often under very hot, slippery conditions. Chemical vapors are continually produced and caustic chemicals are used in the cleaning process. High-temperature stills are almost continually “cooking down” cleaning solvents in order to remove impurities so that the solvents can be reused. If a mistake is made in this process “ such as injecting too much steam into the still “ a boilover occurs, in which boiling chemical solvent erupts out of the still, onto the floor, and onto anyone who happens to be standing   in its way. As a result of these hazards and the fact that chemically hazardous waste is continually produced in these stores, several government agencies have instituted strict guidelines regarding the management of these plants.

2. What all would you suggest to the owners to implement new safety program so that employees safety are taken care? (5M)

III. Jennifer and Mel disagree over the importance of having performance appraisals. Mel says it’s quite clear whether any particular Learn In Motion employee is doing his or her job. It’s obvious, for instance, if the salespeople are selling, if the Web designer is designing, if the Web surfer is surfing, and if the content management people are managing to get the customers’ content up on the Web site in a timely fashion. Mel’s position, like that of many small-business managers, is that “we have 1,000 higher-priority things to attend to” such as boosting sales and creating the calendar. And in any case, he says, the employees already get plenty of day-to-day feedback from him or Jennifer regarding what they’re doing right and what they’re doing wrong.
This informal feedback notwithstanding, Jennifer believes that a more formal appraisal approach is required. For one thing, they’re approaching the end of the 90-day “introductory” period for many of these employees, and the owners need to make decisions about whether they should go or stay. And from a practical point of view, Jennifer just believes that sitting down and providing formal, written feedback is more likely to reinforce what employees are doing right, and to get them to modify what they might be doing wrong. “Maybe this is one reason we’re not getting enough sales,” she says.
 She believes that there are criteria such as Percentage of sales plan execution, profitability per given period, percentage of plan execution on new customers, percentage of selling expenses versus budget, percentage of orders secured (compared to previous period) should be evaluated quarterly for sales managers. Furthermore, she feels quite strongly that the sales managers need to be assessed on behavioural performance such as Innovation, Training and recruiting of other employees, motivation (internal and team), management of accounts and tasks, Efficiency in meeting goals and professional development (10M)

3.1 Is Jenifer right about the need to evaluate the workers formally? Why or Why not? If you think she is right, how would you counter Mel’s arguments? 5M
3.2. Based on the information given in caselet , develop graphic scale performance rating for Sales Manager?  5M
