BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY & SCIENCE, PILANI – HYDERABAD
I Semester 2013-2014         Course No: HSS F328                           Marks: 40                       Date: 01 /11/14
Course Title: Human Resource Development    Duration: 60min             Day: Saturday 


Q1. Your 5 HRD course friends conducted training workshop on “Team building skill” for 1 hour for 30 trainees. Objectives of the training were  i) to make trainees understand stages of team building i.e. forming, storming, norming and adjourning  prevalent in the management literature ii) how team forms    iii) how  team leads to synergy and how is it useful to enhance performance by complementary team members competencies. Thus training workshop was divided into 3 modules to accomplish these above 3 objectives.

In module 1 trainer gave a power point presentation explaining the very definitions of team, how it differs from group, advantage of team, stages of team formation. 
In module 2 trainees were grouped into 5 teams and each team was given role play. Later their experiences were shared to understand the stages of team formation. 
In module 3, trainer gave each trainee one mathematical question to solve and their scored were noted down. Later on, they were grouped into 5 teams and asked to resolve the same mathematical question together as a team. Score of individual score were compared with group score. Advantages of team over individual performance were compared and discussed.  Trainees at the end of workshop gave a rating of 3.8 out of scale of 5(5 being highest).

Evaluate the training program effectiveness w.r.t trainee’s orientations, learning principles and methods. (10M)


Q2. Maytag solutions is an emerging BPO company located in Hyderabad where probability of finding English speaking people is high. Maytag employed 450 people, most of who were young college graduates. Employee turnover rate were around 35-40 percent. Meenakshi, the newly appointed HR manager of Maytag was puzzled initially. To her surprise, she found that around 40% of those who left had felt “mismatch” between job and their interest. Further 15% of employees who were asked to leave the organization on grounds of inefficiency. These two findings focused Meenakshi ‘s  attention on the effectiveness of selection tool. Further probe into issue revealed that the people who were retrenched by organization for reasons of underperformance, has actually performed very well during various stages of the selection procedure. It was also found that when the selection tests were administered for the same group of people at two different instances, the results obtained in terms of their performance, varied considerably.  (10M)

Explain the issue in the above case and suggest the solution to Meenakshi in resolving the problem. 

1

Q3. You are the manager of a group of employees whose task it is to assemble components. You find that quality is not what it should be and that many of your group’s devices have to be brought back & reworked; Your boss advises “You better start doing a better job of training your workers” (10M) 

 Explain how would you go about assessing whether it is in fact a training problem?




Q4. British Gas is part of the Centrica Group. This is a multi-national company, operating in the UK and Europe and the UK’s largest energy supplier. British Gas Services (BGS) is the arm of the business that deals with installing and maintaining services, rather than gas supply. To deliver these services effectively, BGS needs the right staff, with the right skills. 
Managers at British gas conduct a programme of forecasting to predict how much the UK market for domestic gas engineering services will grow. It involves extending past rate of change into the future. Managers find out the number of engineers required to customer base. This helps the company decide how many additional engineers it will need in the future. 
As part of its workforce planning, British Gas implements a diversity and inclusion strategy using tailored action plans. This means it actively seeks new recruits from a wide range of backgrounds. The need to recruit a diverse engineering workforce is seen as critical by British Gas. It plans recruitment to ensure it has a socially inclusive workforce. This is important as it will enable British Gas to reflect the diversity of its customer base. For example, it is useful to have employees from different nationalities and backgrounds to communicate with customers that do not speak English as a first language. Recruiting more women engineers may help to attract female customers. To dispel the myth that only men can be good engineers, British Gas runs a Georgina and the Dragon campaign. This has had some success. The British Gas Academy has won an award from Women into Science and Engineering as well as a national award from the Council for Registered Gas Installers (CORGI) for its efforts to encourage and attract women into the engineering workforce and into plumbing and associated trades. In May 2008 the recruitment team at British Gas was recognized by Opportunity Now, winning the prestigious award for 'Inspiring the workforce of the future'. British Gas tries to appeal to a varied and diverse audience when promoting its apprenticeships. To advertise opportunities widely, British Gas uses specialist Sky channels like Parliamentary Projects TV, which focuses on careers, and Passion TV, which is aimed at the black community. In print media, it uses women's magazines, publications targeted at ethnic minorities such as The Muslim Weekly as well as other careers directories for the same reason. Other channels include radio, newspapers, British Gas website (www.britishgasacademy.co.uk) and a DVD for schools
Selection takes place at the BGS assessment center and has three parts: an interview based on the online questionnaire ;role-play of customer service situations ;a manual dexterity test. The scores from the tests and exercises are combined to decide who is offered a position. (10M)
   

