BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY & SCIENCE, PILANI – HYDERABAD
I Semester 2013-2014          Course No: MGTS C362 / HSS F328             Marks: 40              Date: 25/09/13
Course Title: Human Resource Development                         Duration: 50min            


1. In Rubbermaid, competitive business strategy is based on innovation (differentiation). At Rubbermaid, 30% of its sales are derived from the products that are less than 5 years old. Specific HR programs adopted for work systems include broadly defined jobs, team orientation, flexibility and loose work planning. Mention any one HR policies in each functional area i.e (staffing, appraising, training and compensation) that should be adopted by HR managers of Rubbermaid institute to align with its business strategy. Also what type of organizational structure is suitable for differentiation strategy (4+1= 5M).


2. You have been appointed as the HR manager of Renaissance Industries limited Bangalore. It proposes to select management trainees for its different departments. What sources should it explore and how should the trainees be selected?  (5M)


3. What type of validity is been tested, if you are using work sample test for hiring mechanic? Personality test checks which type of validity? What is the disadvantage of concurrent validation over predictive validation?

4. There is a clear overlap between the core roles of modern HRM and the traditional functions of personnel management. However the emphasis has changed. How? (5M)

 5. “Today’s organization especially service sectors focus on the individual rather than on the job because most of employees conduct a myriad of activities, too far reaching for standard job analysis”. As a HR manager how will you go for job analysis in this type of high performance work environments? (5M)

6. Suppose HR planner estimate that because of several technological innovations your company need 25% few employees in 3 years. What actions would you take today? (5M)

7. List out any 4 strategies available to HR managers for enriching jobs in an organization. (5M)

8. What are the different kinds of growth strategies that an organization can adopt? (5M)

