BIRLA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY & SCIENCE, PILANI – HYDERABAD
I Semester 2013-2014      Course No: MGTS C362                           Marks: 40                       Date:06 /11/13
Course Title: Human Resource Development    Duration: 60min                 Test-2 


Q1. Your 5 HRD friends conducted training workshop on “Leadership” for 1 hours for 30 trainees. Objectives of the training was to   i) to make trainees understand the types of leadership style prevalent in the management literature ii) Self Assessment (trainees) of leadership style iii) how to become an effective leader

In order to accomplish the objective i) trainer gave a ppt presentation explaining the very definitions of types of leaders, examples and characteristic of each style. For self assessment exercise questionnaire was distributed among 30 trainees. They were given 15 minutes of time, under which they have to rate themselves against each questionnaire with the rating scale of 1-5.With this exercise trainees were able to assess their own leadership style. In order to make trainees understand the 3rd objective, trainers came up with scenario building exercise with trainees been asked to react, do role plays and group discussion. Trainees at the end of workshop gave a rating of 3.5 out of scale of 5(5 being highest).

Evaluate the training program effectiveness in terms of “Trainees Orientations”, Learning Principles” and Methods. (15M)

Q2. A large scale industrial establishment in Nasik with 120 workers, the only recognized union in the establishment places a charter of demands before the management which included i) enhancement of minimum wages and dear allowance by 25% ii) reduction of maximum daily hours from 9 to 8, iii) a minimum of 15 percent bonus iv) improvement in the quality of food in the canteen and v) provision of adequate safety equipments. 

The issue of enhancement of minimum wages and dear allowance was decided by mutual dissensions between the parties The question of reduction in daily hours of work was jointly referred to a local dignitary for disposal and his decision was forced to them.. On the request of the parties the question of minimum bonus was referred to a state tribunal for the decision.. On the question of improvement of quality of food in the canteen, participative methods were recommended with committee having equal number of workers and employees.  The parties availed the services of advisory, non-statutory consultative bodies i.e. official of the labor department of the state during negotiations on the questions of provision of safety equipments

 What all were the methods used to resolve the issue demanded by Trade union before the management. Justify your choice. (10 M)






Q3. Kandla joined Mohit Textiles as production worker in January, 2013. Mohit Textile was leading player in the textile industry and offered employees high wages as compared to other players. All these motivated Kandla to join the firm. In the month of August, the supervisor received orders from the top management that they should speed up the production process as demand for products had reached a peak in the market. Most of the workers had to work over-time and Kandla was one among them. In his previous job, any over-time would be paid and other benefits of working overtime like food and transportation facilities for employee were taken care. After a month of over-time, Kandla found that he was not being paid and also observed that the supervisor was being biased towards some employees by giving them travel allowances etc. for over-time. Some of his friends on the floor said it was a common practice and there was nothing much they could do about it. When he took up this matter with the supervisor, he did not get a satisfactory reply. The supervisor displayed a care-not attitude and was arrogant in his behavior. Kandla was advised by his colleagues to calm down as the supervisor had the strong support of some union leaders and was warned that in case he planned to take up this issue with the management, he would probably lose his job.  Kandla felt that someone had to take up the cause of the workers and decided to report this matter to his higher authorities. Since management was under pressure of delivering goods, the management didn’t pay much attention to his problems. In addition, the supervisor started troubling Kandla by harassing him on the job. He now started taking active part in the union activities and started instigating his co-workers against the supervisor and the management. The management, unaware of all this, was busy pursuing its production targets to meet the market demand.

What went wrong at Mohit textiles and as a HR manager what system would you recommend to be taken to prevent such problems in the future? Why Kandla started taking active part in the union activities? (10M)


Q4.Precision Tool Engineering is a company producing machinery and machine tools. Management decided to resolve process methods, by forming problem solving groups with voluntary participation. Group leaders who were mainly supervisors were trained. Aim of the group was to identify the problem, propose the solutions, refer problem to a review team. 
What participative method is been discussed in the above caselet. At what level is the Precision Tool Engineering following the empowerment programme.  Justify your choice. (5M)


